---
layout: page
title: Design Manifesto
subtitle: How I See Design
---

### Introduction

Towards the beginning of the semester, I was very curious about the design process. It wasn’t a complete mystery to me; I understood it was a long, iterative process, that was performed best by a diverse group of people, but I still lacked the skills and experience to fully understand the process of designing a product, service, or interface. During the course of my team’s project, [Trendy Trash](http://www.grchen.com/thisprojectistrash/), we were exposed to the tools and skills that support every stage of the design process, whether it be information gathering, usability testing, or communicating our ideas. I realize now that there is so much more to design that I have yet to learn, but the foundations of what makes good design have become much clearer. Here are the five key points that I believe should drive the design process:
* Ethics are the foundation of any design; designers design for people, who have rights.
* Because designers design for people, they should make our design accessible to as many people as possible.
* Diversity doesn’t spread our goal thin, it supports it.
* Iteration: People’s needs change, and so should our design.
* One’s own intuition and personal experience narrow a designer’s options.

### The Ethics of Design

Technology is advancing at rate that is difficult to keep up with. There are technologies that exist that reshape the way we do a lot of things, whether its medicine, travel, or even social media and entertainment. With these new technologies comes uncharted territory when it comes to ethics and legal rights, but that does not mean they must be neglected. We didn’t run into any issues in our project when it came to ethics or our users’ rights, but we have come across many issues, whether in the news or the readings, that pertain to the issue of ethics in computer science and violations of users’ rights. Take, for example, [the issue of Airbnb](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/airbnb-new-orleans-housing_us_59f33054e4b03cd20b811699) becoming a new form of gentrification in New Orleans neighborhoods. The neighborhoods that were once an integral part of New Orleans culture slowly became hotspots for tourists who had little respect for the space they were visiting, forcing many locals to move from what was once their home. Airbnb, like other similar short-term renting services, is still relatively young, and it is unlikely that the ways in which they affected those neighborhoods in New Orleans were the goal of Airbnb. However, given that this came as a result of Airbnb’s services, it is still their responsibility to make amends. 
The issue of ethics, of course, isn’t black and white. Some problems can be avoided during the design process, while others arise from the ‘newness’ of the design, moving into unexplored territory. Take the common example of Therac-25, a radiation therapy machine that caused deaths and injuries due to design mistakes. Overflow errors that were overlooked during programming and unclear error messages that could be overridden were mistakes that could have been avoided during the design process. I doubt it was the intention of the designers to cause the harm that they did, but they were aware of what their design would be used for and what liabilities come with that; the mistakes should have been avoided.
It is because of these mistakes that ethics should be part of the foundation of design. We design for people, who have rights, and designers must be aware of what rights their design might involve, whether it is the right to privacy through social media or their right to protection from programming errors. 

### Accessibility

Not all users have the same capabilities. Some users are bound to have a need for some sort of accommodation. In order to reach a larger number of users, the design needs to be accessible to a variety of different users. Accessibility tends to bring to mind blindness, deafness, or physical disability, but accessibility also extends to users with hearing difficulties, dyslexia, poor eyesight, or even anxiety. Designs don’t need to be completely overhauled to address these needs. In some cases, simply changing the font style or the color scheme can make the design more approachable and effective for some users.
A design won’t always be able to be accessible to every single users, and this sometimes depends on the design; Google Glass is unlikely to be used by blind users. However, it should be a goal of the designer to broaden the reach of the design, making an effort to make the design as accessible to as many users as possible.

### Diversity

Effective design relies on addressing a problem from many different angles. The more angles designers have on a problem, the more possible solutions can come to light. There isn’t a catch-all solution to any design problem; sometimes the solution is purely technical, sometimes social, sometimes psychological, and so on. One cannot expect any single designer to completely understand a multi-faceted problem alone. Thus a team, one whose members’ backgrounds and expertise differ, is necessary. To put this into context, suppose we had the opportunity to put together a team to work on Trendy Trash. Ideally, we would at least have the following kinds of team members: a computer scientist, responsible for the technical aspect of designing the interface; an environmental scientist, who could give us insight into what waste disposal problems are most critical; a psychologist could help us figure out how to best reenforce good behavior.
This diversity does not only apply to the design team itself, but also to the users. We obviously cannot control the people who might use our design, but we can control how we conduct our research and testing. This relates somewhat to what I addressed earlier regarding accessibility; we want to broaden the groups of people that can use our design, and therefore we want to research the needs of different groups of users (e.g. novice/expert, younger/older, different cultures, etc.). This way, our design is effective. What good is a design if only a handful of people can use it?
We encountered this during the usability testing stage of our project. One user seemed very comfortable with using the interface, and completed the tasks without needing much assistance. Other users, on the other hand, were stuck on a few stages of the usability test, requiring the facilitator to step in and guide them. Had we only tested our interface on the first user, or had other users who had similar experiences, we wouldn’t have found flaws in our design that were misleading or confusing, and ultimately made our design difficult to navigate.

### Iteration

As with solving any problem, finding a design solution is rarely achieved on the first try, and even after finding it, it will need to change eventually. Iteration is a concept that exists throughout the later stages of the design process. Once a basic prototype is created, it is tested, revised, and tested again, until the design is narrowed down to what works. The design process needs to be flexible; what seemed like a good idea at the beginning may prove to be ineffective in later testing, and a designer should be able to revise on that discovery. Even after implementing a design, users’ needs might change, and the design needs to reflect that change, through iteration. What used to be a sign for danger, the skull and crossbones is now a playful symbol for pirates found on children’s costumes. 
The flexibility of iterative design allows a designer to really see what works and what doesn’t. Using our paper prototypes for Trendy Trash, for example, we were able to easily change our design based on the feedback we received from our users. We were quick, flexible, and adapting to what the users were telling us, allowing us to push our design further in the right direction, honing in on what truly works for our users.

### Intuition

A designer must remember that they do not design for themselves, but for a group of users that are, in fact, very different from the designer. It is easy in the early stages of a design to imagine what would be an ideal solution for oneself. It also easy, towards the end of the process, to see one’s design as clear and effective. A designer’s intuition might not match up with the experiences of their users. If a designer is an expert with technology, and they design based on their own intuition, they are losing novice users who aren’t as comfortable with technology, or other expert users who don’t use the same technology as the designer. This is where the research stage of the design process is so crucial, as it helps the designer understand who they are designing, and what they are trying to achieve through the design.  Intuition doesn’t only appear in the early stages of design; they can also carry through to the implementation of the design.  As an example, during our usability testing for Trendy Trash, we assumed it was clear that the interface was a touchscreen, and that users knew to interact with it as such. Some users, however, showed us that this wasn’t the case. Thus we had to implement some sort of prompt to interact with the screen. We also assumed that users would know to use the navigation buttons to control the timeframe of the data. One user surprised us by trying to pinch zoom out to see a broader timeframe. We hadn’t thought of that sort of implementation at the time, but it could definitely be incorporated in later iterations.

### Overview

It seems that essence of design is empathy, or an ability to understand people. This applies to most of the points I discussed. One needs to understand what needs people have, how they might behave, how their intuition differs from one’s own, what they deem important, and so on. The tools we learned this semester are incredibly useful, but there are so many more different tools in the design world. But what they all have in common, is that they are tools to better understand the people one is designing for.
